Add Best Practice: Favor Composite Builds (#33081)
gradle/gradle: platforms/documentation/docs/src/docs/userguide/best-practices/bp_general.adoc

=== Tags
`#upgrades`

[[favor_composite_builds]]

> == Favor Composite Builds over `buildSrc`

Reviewer: Should we mention this is for plugins in the title?

For Plugins Favor Composite Builds over `buildSrc`

Author: I meant for it to be broader than plugins, as there are other types of non-plugin build-logic you might want to include: like libraries containing task types (or types used by task types) you might need to use in buildscripts.  This is probably much less common though.

Author: OK, I'll add that clarification to the title.

:keywords: structuring-builds,composite-builds,buildSrc

You should setup a <<composite_builds.adoc#defining_composite_builds,Composite Build>> (commonly called an "included build") to hold your _build logic_ (such as any plugins - including convention plugins - and other customizations that are specific to your build).

=== Explanation

> The preferred location for build logic is an included build named `build-logic`, **not** in `buildSrc`.

Author: I think we call the overall structure of a build that includes other builds a "composite build".  The build-that-is-included is not itself a composite build.

> The automatically available `buildSrc` is great for rapid prototyping, but suffers from some subtle disadvantages:

Reviewer: Should we call out the advantage that included builds can be used standalone and even turn into binary plugins in the future.

I vaguely remember that tests in buildSrc run before the configuration of the main project. Is that still true in the latest version of Gradle?

Author: On the buildSrc tests running prior to main project configuration: This is not true.  Also, the tests don't automatically run unless requested.

For example, this integration test I just wrote (which you can drop into any integration test in the `plugins-java-library` project to run):

```
    def "buildSrc tests run prior to main project configuration"() {
        given:
        file("buildSrc/src/test/java/BuildSrcTest.java") << """
            import org.junit.Test;

            public class BuildSrcTest {
                @Test
                public void test() {
                    throw new RuntimeException("BuildSrcTest failing");
                }
            }
        """

        file("buildSrc/build.gradle") << """
            plugins {
                id "java"
            }

            repositories {
                mavenCentral()
            }

            dependencies {
                testImplementation "junit:junit:4.13.2"
            }
        """

        buildFile << """
            tasks.register("main") {
                println "configuring main project"

                def someOutputFile = file("outputFile.txt")
                outputs.file(someOutputFile)
                doLast {
                    someOutputFile << UUID.randomUUID().toString()
                }
            }
        """

        when:
        fails("main")
//        fails("main", ":buildSrc:test")

        then:
        !output.contains("configuring main project") // If buildSrc tests fail, this line should not be printed
    }
```

fails because `buildSrc` is compiled, but **NOT** automatically tested.  If you comment out `fails("main")` and uncomment `fails("main", ":buildSrc:test")`, explicitly asking for the tests to be run also, the test now fails, as `configuring main project` is printed.  Swapping the order these 2 tasks are requested doesn't matter: main project configuration runs first.

Likewise, tests in included builds are not automatically run unless they are explicitly requested.

- There are classloader differences in how these 2 approaches behave that can be surprising; included builds are treated just like external dependencies, which is a simpler mental model.  Dependency resolution behaves subtly differently in buildSrc.

> - There can potentially be fewer task invalidations in a build when files in an included build are modified, leading to faster builds.

Reviewer: I think we need to specify more details on when you get no-invalidations in included builds but you do in buildSrc. As-is, it is a bit vague.

Author: https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/organizing_gradle_projects.html#sec:build_sources says "A change in buildSrc causes the whole project to become out-of-date."  We could include that sentence here.

@wolfs - Is this still true?

@lkasso - If we do accept this item, should we change the linked section as part of this PR as well?  It might seem a little at odds with this item.

Reviewer 2: I depends on what "out-of-date" means. All tasks that are not built-in Gradle tasks will be out of date. Though the same is true for changes in included plugin builds.

Reviewer 3: > If we do accept this item, should we change the linked section as part of this PR as well?
Yes, but I would do the bare minimum.
As part of my April snippet cleanup, I was planning on either adding included builds to buildSrc material or flat-out replacing it.

- Included builds are complete Gradle builds and can be opened, worked on, and built independently as standalone projects.

Ideally, there shouldn’t be any differences between these 2 approaches, and `buildSrc` should behave like an implicitly available included build if present.

> However, due to historical reasons, these differences currently exist.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
However, due to historical reasons, some subtle differences still exist.
```

> It is likely that in the future this recommendation will be weakened or removed entirely, as Gradle continues to work to converge the behavior of these two approaches.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Gradle is actively working to unify the behavior of these two approaches, and this recommendation may be revised in the future.
```

Author: "Actively is iffy for an item opened in 2018.  I'll take the rest of the suggestion.

> At present, however, the differences can be a potential stumbling block.

Reviewer: Do we have any issues tracking the convergence? It might be nice to link.

Author: There is [this](https://github.com/gradle/gradle/issues/6045).  I'll link it in the references.

> At present, however, the differences can be a potential stumbling block.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For now, these differences can introduce confusion and are best avoided.
```

> As there is only minor additional configuration necessary to setup a composite build, we recommend using these instead of `buildSrc`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Since setting up a composite build requires only minimal additional configuration, we recommend using it over `buildSrc`.
```

=== Tags

`<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:upgrades,#upgrades>>`

[[favor_composite_builds]]
== Favor Composite Builds over `buildSrc`
:keywords: structuring-builds,composite-builds,buildSrc

You should setup a <<composite_builds.adoc#defining_composite_builds,Composite Build>> (often called an "included build") to hold your build logic—including any custom plugins, convention plugins, and other build-specific customizations.

=== Explanation

> The preferred location for build logic is an included build named `build-logic`, **not** in `buildSrc`.

Reviewer 4: I would change the wording about naming the included build. Right now it suggests that it **has to** be named as such.

> The automatically available `buildSrc` is great for rapid prototyping, but it comes with some subtle disadvantages:

Author: I just rebased and rebuilt and I don't see any problems here: 
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/74863cb7-da90-4e8c-a5e9-5dc27a8cbcc6)

Ideally, there would be no difference between using `buildSrc` and an included build, `buildSrc` is intended to behave like an implicitly available included build.
However, due to historical reasons, some subtle differences still exist.
Gradle is working to unify the behavior of these two approaches, and this recommendation may be revised in the future.
For now, these differences can introduce confusion and are best avoided.

Since setting up a composite build requires only minimal additional configuration, we recommend using it over `buildSrc`.

=== Example

==== Don't Do This

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/kotlin/buildSrc",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=avoid-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/groovy/buildSrc",files="build.gradle[tags=avoid-this]"]
====

*Setup a Plugin Build*: This is the same using either method.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=avoid-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=avoid-this]"]
====

> *BuildSrc products are automatically usable*: There is no additional configuration with this method.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
*buildSrc products are automatically usable*: There is no additional configuration with this method.
```

==== Do This Instead

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-do/kotlin/build-logic",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=do-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-do/groovy/build-logic",files="build.gradle[tags=do-this]"]
====

*Setup a Plugin Build*: This is the same using either method.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-do/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=do-this]"]

> include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-do/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=do-this]"]

Reviewer 4: Nice to have comment - I would name both projects the same and remove the "avoid"/"do" part. This is easy to understand when you see both, but when I've seen only the "do" one it took me a second to understand this.

Author: The directories need to be distinct, but I can update the `rootProject.name` in the settings files.  Is this what you mean?

Reviewer 4: Yeah, it's about what user sees in the snippets :)

=== Tags

<<tags_reference.adoc#tag:upgrades,`#upgrades`>>

[[favor_composite_builds]]
== Favor Composite Builds over `buildSrc`
:keywords: structuring-builds,composite-builds,buildSrc

You should setup a <<composite_builds.adoc#defining_composite_builds,Composite Build>> (often called an "included build") to hold your build logic—including any custom plugins, convention plugins, and other build-specific customizations.

=== Explanation

The preferred location for build logic is an included build (typically named `build-logic`), **not** in `buildSrc`.

The automatically available `buildSrc` is great for rapid prototyping, but it comes with some subtle disadvantages:

> * There are classloader differences in how these 2 approaches behave that can be surprising; included builds are treated just like external dependencies, which is a simpler mental model.  Dependency resolution behaves subtly differently in buildSrc.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* There are classloader differences in how these 2 approaches behave that can be surprising; included builds are treated just like external dependencies, which is a simpler mental model.  Dependency resolution behaves subtly differently in `buildSrc`.
```

> * There can potentially be fewer task invalidations in a build when files in an included build are modified, leading to faster builds.  A change in `buildSrc` causes the whole project to become out-of-date.

Author: I added a clarifying sentence.

* Included builds are complete Gradle builds and can be opened, worked on, and built independently as standalone projects.  It is straightforward to publish their products, including plugins, in order to share them with other projects.
* The `buildSrc` project automatically applies the `java` plugin, which may be unnecessary.

One important caveat to this recommendation is when creating `Settings` plugins.
Defining these in a `build-logic` project requires it to be included in the `pluginManagement` block of the main build's `settings.gradle` file, in order to make these plugins available to the build early enough to be applied to the `Settings` instance.

> This is possible, but imposes a significant performance penalty.

Author: I'm not sure we want to mention DV here?

I'm not sure how to phrase the lack of shared configuration.  Is this documented somewhere?

> This is possible, but imposes a significant performance penalty.

Reviewer 3: I don't think this needs to be mentioned since a power user would probably know this already, but you could add something like:

```suggestion
This is possible, but imposes a significant performance penalty and reduces Build Caching capability.
```

If you need to create and apply a `Settings` plugin, you should create it in `buildSrc` for now.

Another potential reason to use `buildSrc` is if you have a very large number of subprojects within your included `build-logic`.

> This may have performance implications, as Gradle maintains a separate classloader for each project.

Author: I'm not sure here, I was just trying to update based on my notes.  @wolfs can you perhaps suggest how to rephrase this?

> This may have performance implications, as Gradle maintains a separate classloader for each project.

Reviewer 3: +1

> This may have performance implications, as Gradle maintains a separate classloader for each project.

Reviewer 2: What I am talking about here is that you might fall into the trap to have many different classpaths for your projects (extreme: every project has a different one), since you apply a different set of build-logic plugins to each of them. Using a multi-project build-logic build somewhat promotes this practice, though it is actually an anti-pattern.

> This may have performance implications, as Gradle maintains a separate classloader for each project.

Author: I've tried to update the phrasing here.  Please take a look.

If these subprojects were moved to `buildSrc`, Gradle would only maintain a single classloader for the entire `buildSrc` project - this is more performant but possibly unintiutive, as it would restrict different versions of plugins from being applied in these different subprojects.

Ideally, there would be no difference between using `buildSrc` and an included build, as `buildSrc` is intended to behave like an implicitly available included build.
However, due to historical reasons, these subtle differences still exist.

> Gradle is working to unify the behavior of these two approaches, and this recommendation may be revised in the future.

Author: This long-term goal is one we talked about and specifically wanted to mention here.

I think wondering why these 2 things behave any differently at all will be a common reaction we should anticipate and respond to here.  I didn't offer anything specific, just confirming that we don't want this to continue to be a problem.

> Gradle is working to unify the behavior of these two approaches, and this recommendation may be revised in the future.

Reviewer 5: ❌ We are not actively working on that so I would not write we are in documentation.

We don't even have a design spec of how this would be done. There are several unanswered questions around this. For example, how could we deprecate accessing `buildSrc` types without applying a plugin (required in a composite build scenario)? Also I don't see a good path to change the fact that `buildSrc` can't be used for settings plugin by making it a proper included build.

For now, these differences can introduce confusion.

Since setting up a composite build requires only minimal additional configuration, we recommend using it over `buildSrc` in most cases.

=== Example

==== Don't Do This

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/kotlin/buildSrc",files="build.gradle.kts[tags=avoid-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/groovy/buildSrc",files="build.gradle[tags=avoid-this]"]
====

*Set up a Plugin Build*: This is the same using either method.

====
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/kotlin",files="settings.gradle.kts[tags=avoid-this]"]
include::sample[dir="snippets/bestPractices/favorCompositeBuilds-avoid/groovy",files="settings.gradle[tags=avoid-this]"]
====

> *BuildSrc products are automatically usable*: There is no additional configuration with this method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
*`BuildSrc` products are automatically usable*: There is no additional configuration with this method.
```

* There can potentially be fewer task invalidations in a build when files in an included build are modified, leading to faster builds.  Any change in `buildSrc` causes the entire build to become out-of-date, whereas changes in a subproject of an included build only cause projects in the build using the products of that particular subproject to be out-of-date.
* Included builds are complete Gradle builds and can be opened, worked on, and built independently as standalone projects.  It is straightforward to publish their products, including plugins, in order to share them with other projects.
* The `buildSrc` project automatically applies the `java` plugin, which may be unnecessary.

One important caveat to this recommendation is when creating `Settings` plugins.
Defining these in a `build-logic` project requires it to be included in the `pluginManagement` block of the main build's `settings.gradle(.kts)` file, in order to make these plugins available to the build early enough to be applied to the `Settings` instance.

> This is possible, but imposes a significant performance penalty and reduces Build Caching capability.

Author: Mabye there isn't one otherwise and saying build caching capability is enough.  @wolfs?

> This is possible, but imposes a significant performance penalty and reduces Build Caching capability.

Author: OK, I'll simplify this then.

> If you need to create and apply a `Settings` plugin, you should create it in `buildSrc` for now.

Reviewer 5: ❌ `buildSrc` can't be used for Settings plugins because `buildSrc` is built after settings are evaluated!
